nssp documentation draft (#1439)
cmu-delphi/delphi-epidata: docs/api/covidcast-signals/nssp.md

* **Date of last change:** Never
* **Available for:** county, hrr, msa, state (see [geography coding docs](../covidcast_geography.md))
* **Time type:** week (see [date format docs](../covidcast_times.md))
* **License:** [Public Domain US Government](https://www.usa.gov/government-works)

## Overview

[The National Syndromic Surveillance Program (NSSP)](https://www.cdc.gov/nssp/php/about/index.html) is an effort to track epidemiologically relevant conditions.
This dataset in particular tracks emergency department (ED) visits arising from a subset of influenza-like illnesses, specifically influenza, COVID-19, and RSV.
It is derived from the CDC's [Respiratory Virus Response NSSP Emergency Department Visit Trajectories dataset](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/2023-Respiratory-Virus-Response-NSSP-Emergency-Dep/rdmq-nq56/about_data), which started reporting data in late 2022.
As of May 2024, NSSP received data from 78% of US EDs.

| Signal                          | Description                                                             |
|---------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `pct_visits_covid`              | Percent of ED visits that had a discharge diagnosis code of covid              |

Author: pretty sure they'll all be the same, but makes sense. I'll add it.

| `pct_visits_influenza`          | Percent of ED visits that had a discharge diagnosis code of influenza          |

> | `pct_visits_rsv`                | Percent of ED visits that had a discharge diagnosis code of rsv                |

Reviewer: @nmdefries, sorry I'm late here!

Minor suggestion: In the TOC, consider adding a link to the "Overview" to maintain consistency with the TOCs of signals such as "Change Healthcare" and "Doctor Visits".

Nothing else stands out, the headings are great. Thanks!

> | `pct_visits_rsv`                | Percent of ED visits that had a discharge diagnosis code of rsv                |

Author: thanks for looking! Though I don't really follow what you mean. When I look at the table of contents in `doctor-visits`:
https://github.com/cmu-delphi/delphi-epidata/blob/e423cb4a004389f7ac7adc1d26c40207bcf43dcc/docs/api/covidcast-signals/doctor-visits.md?plain=1#L30-L36
it seems just the same as what's here?
https://github.com/cmu-delphi/delphi-epidata/blob/28482cf5547ee3e7c4c5be4c96ae5cd96fa0fe7b/docs/api/covidcast-signals/nssp.md?plain=1#L35-L40

> | `pct_visits_rsv`                | Percent of ED visits that had a discharge diagnosis code of rsv                |

Reviewer 2: Waiting for a response from Roni about naming

> | `pct_visits_rsv`                | Percent of ED visits that had a discharge diagnosis code of rsv                |

Reviewer: @dsweber2 sorry for the confusion: you can prob just ignore my comment! I think the "Overview" section I'm pointing to may be contained in the {:toc} . Here's a visual where in doctor's visits the TOC has "Overview" circled in red:
![image](https://github.com/cmu-delphi/delphi-epidata/assets/11445176/a937daba-368b-4f2f-99a6-7ce604b14949)
Thanks!

For example, we might expect denser, more urban counties to have 1) more and larger EDs and 2) easier access to EDs. The first factor may mean that residents of rural counties are more likely to go to EDs in urban counties. The second factor may increase the total number of ED visits that someone living in an urban county will make, that is, the average urban resident may make more ED visits than the average rural resident.

As a result, total ED visits per capita in rural counties may be lower than total ED visits per capita in urban counties. Since our weighting approach uses population as the weighting factor, rural counties would tend to be overrepresented in estimated values.

Some low population counties occasionally report outliers, e.g. 33.33%, 50%, 100% of ER visits being covid-related. As of May 2024, an analysis shows around 10 unusually high values across the full history of all signals, so they are rare. We expect that these high rates are by chance, due to a small total number of ED visits in a given week.

## Missingness

> As of May 2024, NSSP received data from 78% of US EDs.

Reviewer 2: Do we have a link for this number?

Author: it's on the very bottom of the [main NSSP index](https://www.cdc.gov/nssp/php/about/index.html). Felt a little redundant linking to it again, but could definitely include

The most noticeable gaps in [county coverage](https://www.cdc.gov/nssp/media/images/2024/04/Participation-with-date.png) are in California, Colorado, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Virginia, though most states have some counties that are absent.

The following states have no country-level data at all: CA, WA, AK, AZ, AL, CO, SD, ND, MO, AR, FL, OH, NH, CT, NJ.
Counties which do not have data are listed, but with an `NA` value.

At the state level, South Dakota, Missouri, and territories are not reported.

## Lag and Backfill

The weekly signal is reported on Friday mornings, adding data from the prior week.
For example, on Friday, 2024-04-19, the source added new data from the week ending 2024-04-13.

This data source has frequent backfill, primarily arising from newly included EDs. When a new facility joins the reporting network, its historical data is added to the dataset, resulting in changes to historical values for every geographic level that ED is part of (county through nation). Because of this, the broadest geographic levels are more likely to be revised.

> In previous revisions, we have noted changes to values dating back about 2 years.

Author: Do we have a similar revision analysis posted on the other sources? I don't ever remember seeing them. I agree it would be useful, but that sounds more like an overall doc overhaul thing

> In previous revisions, we have noted changes to values dating back about 2 years.

Reviewer 2: We have this type of info [for some sources](https://cmu-delphi.github.io/delphi-epidata/api/covidcast-signals/hospital-admissions.html#lag-and-backfill). It's something that Roni has requested more detail about recently and that we've wanted info about for various signals at various points in time.

I don't think this is critical to add now, but it will be easiest, since we've done the statistical analysis recently. I was hoping that @minhkhul or you had come across info about this during the analysis.

Questions about are some things that came to mind but are more guiding questions for the type of detail I'd be looking for. They don't all need to be answered exactly, but any additional info would be helpful.

Ultimately, this is up to y'all.

The following states report no data through NSSP at the county level: CA, WA, AK, AZ, AL, CO, SD, ND, MO, AR, FL, OH, NH, CT, NJ.

South Dakota, Missouri, and territories report no data through NSSP at the state level.

## Lag and Backfill

The weekly signal is reported on Friday mornings, adding data from the prior week.
For example, on Friday, 2024-04-19, the source added new data from the week ending 2024-04-13.

This data source has frequent backfill, primarily arising from newly included EDs. When a new facility joins the reporting network, its historical data is added to the dataset, resulting in changes to historical values for every geographic level that ED is part of (county through nation). Because of this, the broadest geographic levels are more likely to be revised.

In previous revisions, we have noted changes to values dating back about 2 years.

## Limitations

There is substantial missingness at the county level. This tends to impact more rural and lower population locations. See the [missingness section](#missingness) for more information.

> Not all counties contain reporting EDs, including in states where NSSP reports state-level data.

Reviewer 2: This is a stub. I was trying to get at the idea that state-level data is based on a subset of counties/EDs and is probably doesn't have much data from more rural places, but then I saw that Orange county doesn't any reporting EDs and it's definitely not rural. So maybe I'm just trying to say "may be inaccurate but we don't know how"?

Author: To be clear, going off [this map](https://www.cdc.gov/nssp/media/images/2024/04/Participation-with-date.png), Orange county could have reporting EDs but just doesn't?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that map. I was trying to think about patterns in counties that don't have reporting EDs and how that would impact aggregated values. Initially I assumed it would be rural counties (low population, no big hospitals, etc). But some high population counties, like Orange county (3.5 million pop), are also missing.

Apparently ~700 counties don't have hospitals at all.

Anyway, you should take this paragraph where you want/where you think would be useful.

NSSP notes that not every patient entering an ED is tested for the conditions of interest, so the data may undercount total cases and as a result percent visits may be biased downward.

Our [geographic weighting approach](#geographic-weighting) assumes that the number of ED visits is proportional to the overall population of a county. However, in reality, there are various factors that could affect the accuracy of this assumption.

For example, we might expect denser, more urban counties to have 1) more and larger EDs and 2) easier access to EDs. The first factor may mean that residents of rural counties are more likely to go to EDs in urban counties. The second factor may increase the total number of ED visits that someone living in an urban county will make, that is, the average urban resident may make more ED visits than the average rural resident over a given period of time.

> As a result, total ED visits per capita in rural counties may be lower than total ED visits per capita in urban counties. Since our weighting approach uses population as the weights, rural counties would tend to be overrepresented in estimated values.

Reviewer 2: Also maybe just "may be inaccurate but we don't know how"? The examples here are true if rural counties are reporting, but if rural counties aren't reporting anything at all, then we will be biased towards urban counties, I guess.

Reviewer 2: I may have overthought this

Author: I think it's clearer than what I had before. I'm changing the wording a bit to make it clearer it's a hypothetical, and not something we have strong evidence for.

As a result, total ED visits per capita in rural counties may be lower than total ED visits per capita in urban counties. If this is a strong dynamic, since our weighting approach uses population as the weights, rural counties would tend to be overrepresented in estimated values.

Some low population counties occasionally report outliers, e.g. 33.33%, 50%, 100% of ER visits being covid-related. As of May 2024, an analysis shows around 10 unusually high values across the full history of all signals, so they are rare. We expect that these high rates are by chance, due to a small total number of ED visits in a given week.

## Source and Licensing

This source is derived from the CDC's [Respiratory Virus Response NSSP Emergency Department Visit Trajectories dataset](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/2023-Respiratory-Virus-Response-NSSP-Emergency-Dep/rdmq-nq56/about_data).
There is another version of the dataset that includes [state data only](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/2023-Respiratory-Virus-Response-NSSP-Emergency-Dep/7mra-9cq9/about_data).

> This data was originally published by the National Center for Health Statistics, and is made available here as a convenience to the forecasting community under the terms of the original license, which is [U.S. Government Public Domain](https://www.usa.gov/government-copyright).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This data was originally published by the CDC, and is made available here as a convenience to the forecasting community under the terms of the original license, which is [U.S. Government Public Domain](https://www.usa.gov/government-copyright).
```

---
title: NSSP
parent: Data Sources and Signals
grand_parent: COVIDcast Main Endpoint
---
# National Syndromic Surveillance Program (NSSP) Emerency Department (ED) visits
{: .no_toc}

* **Source name:** `nssp`

> * **Earliest issue available:** (TODO ask Minh)

Author: For context, I'm also not sure if we want to put this as the earliest issue available based on when we started collecting them, or the earliest issue based on the other tracker's github archive (who only had state-level iirc, and didn't track versions indefinitely).

> * **Earliest issue available:** (TODO ask Minh)

Reviewer 2: This should be the earliest issue that we have in our DB. Or we can add slightly more detail and specify the earliest date from the source, too

> * **Earliest issue available:** (TODO ask Minh)

Reviewer 3: @dsweber2 2024-04-17 is gonna be earliest issue. I have data published from that date onward stashed.

| `smoothed_pct_visits_rsv`       | 3 week moving average of `pct_visits_rsv`                          |
| `smoothed_pct_visits_combined`  | 3 week moving average of `pct_visits_combined`                     |

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta}

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Estimation

The percent visits signals are calculated as a fraction of visits at facilities reporting to NSSP, rather than all facilities in the area.
County and state level data is reported as-is from NSSP, without modification, while `hrr` and `msa` are estimated by Delphi.

### Geographic weighting
As the original data is a percentage and raw case counts are not available, `hrr` and `msa` values are computed from county-level data using a weighted mean. Each county is assigned a weight equal to its population in the last census (2020).
This assumes that the number of ED visits is proportional to the overall population of a county, i.e. the per-capita ED visit rate is the same for all counties, which may not be the case (for example, denser counties may have easier access to EDs and thus higher rates of ED visits per capita).

> State-level data is reported separately, and is **not** simply an average of the county-level data, but may contain facilities omitted at the regional level (for example, if small facilities are excluded for privacy reasons).[^1] 

Author: [The source](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/2023-Respiratory-Virus-Response-NSSP-Emergency-Dep/rdmq-nq56/about_data) is a mix of state and county level data. There is a separate state-only source that we are not using, which is the one that appears to be a rounded version of this one.

That for example should probably be a bit more involved. There are entire states which don't have local data; I suspect it's because the state itself is reporting, even if the local ERs/counties aren't, but they're only providing state-level data.

Compare the state and county level reporting in [this set of graphs](https://github.com/cmu-delphi/covidcast-indicators/pull/1952#issuecomment-2090894314)

As a result, total ED visits per capita in rural counties may be lower than total ED visits per capita in urban counties. Since our weighting approach uses population as the weighting factor, rural counties would tend to be overrepresented in estimated values.

Some low population counties occasionally report outliers, e.g. 33.33%, 50%, 100% of ER visits being covid-related. As of May 2024, an analysis shows around 10 unusually high values across the full history of all signals, so they are rare. We expect that these high rates are by chance, due to a small total number of ED visits in a given week.

## Missingness

As of May 2024, NSSP received data from 78% of US EDs.
The most noticeable gaps in [county coverage](https://www.cdc.gov/nssp/media/images/2024/04/Participation-with-date.png) are in California, Colorado, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Virginia, though most states have some counties that are absent.

The following states have no country-level data at all: CA, WA, AK, AZ, AL, CO, SD, ND, MO, AR, FL, OH, NH, CT, NJ.

> Counties which do not have data are listed, but with an `NA` value.

Reviewer 2: Okay, I will reword above.
